

Welcome to the C++ gamedev for beginners course. I know you must be very excited to start coding, and don't worry, we will be coding a lot, but before we do that I have 2 aspects that might just be even more important than coding itself and they are related to learning.

The best and only way to learn anything, including coding, is to do something that is just a little hard for you but not too hard. This is stepping out of your comfort zone and this is what we are going to do with this course. No matter what your current programming level is, we are going to make a project that's just a little difficult for you, so that by the end of this course, you will be a way better programmer. But, how will I make this work regardless if you are a beginner or more advanced? You will see in just a second.

A few years ago I made this Terraria like project and it was the first big complex project I ever made, and because of that I leveled up a lot in my programming journey, and I want the same thing for you so we are going to do the same thing together. And it just so happens that making a Terraria like game is the perfect project that you can start as your first big game. Why? Well, because unlike other games, making something like Terraria is extremely easy to start but than, it has so many systems that no matter what your current programming level is, you will always find something a little hard for you to do. So for example, to start the project you just need to render a few rectangles on the screen. But than there are so many systems that you can later work on yourself like the world generator, blocks, physics, enemies, UI, NPC interactions, like you could potentially work on this project for years and always be implementing harder and harder things. And remember, that's the key to improving, doing harder things. Now I will guide you in depth to implementing what you can see here, but for you to learn you need to implement some things yourself, not just follow my tutorial and copy paste the code. So while I will lay the foundation of the game for you, and explain you in depth how I did this things, you will have a lot of challenges, so that, you have to implement many things yourself without being able to just copy paste the code.

Don't worry, I will give you guidelines for all the challenges, so you can't possibly fail. For example, I will show you how I implement this slime enemy, but that you will have the challenge of implementing your own enemy. If this is too difficult for you, well you can just use the slime enemy code as a starting point and change it just a little to make a different slime. If that's all you can do and it still feels hard for you it doesn't matter, that's progress. It is your programming journey so it has to be a little hard for you.

 But if this is too easy for you on the other hand, well than you can implement some path finding for it, or even some more advanced enemies. I will give you more assets that you can use for your own stuff, and continue this project long after the course is finished. This is your game so there is no right answer. The point of the project is for you to step out of your comfort zome, whatever that might be, and implement something that is just a little hard for you. If implementing some extremely simple enemy movement is all you can do, that's perfect, terraria also has extremely simple movement for their enemies, I don't think most enemies even have path finding.


Now I need to tell you about how do you actually go about making a big project. A lot of people ask me how do I architecture a big project and I think I have the answer. And I learned it from Casey Muratori. Link to this video in the resources. It is approached based design. Whenever people start a big project, they make the mistake of trying to plan too much ahead. I see especially beginners, that try to plan things in advance, and sketch systems and classes on paper because they are very excited and can't wait to start.

 But here is the big problem with this approach. By doing this you assume you know how things are going to go but that's not at all true. If you want to implement something you haven't done before, you have no idea how it should be done. A big project has a ton of systems that interact in various ways. Without writing the software itself you can't predict all the little interactions. It's like navigating a maze but you can't see the maze in advance. Moreover,  trying to write many systems at once is very hard. Usually beginners start with a ton of classes like a player class and an entity class and than a renderer and maybe a renderable class and the list goes on and on. It's not a problem to have all of this things in your code, but if you start implementing all of them in the same time, think of all the code you need to write just do display one thing on the screen. Imagine writing hundreds of lines of code without being able to test them, there's no way I can do that.

So the solution is approach based design. This means don't plan too much in advance, and just do things step by step. So render a sprite on the screen, and than implement some very simple way of rendering the map and so on. People assume that they need to implement complex abstractions but that's not true. You will see that once you finish this course, the code is very simple, with little abstractions, and because of that, it's very easy to maintain and modify. There is no point in overcomplicating your code with weird generic systems if it works just as well with simpler code. In fact simpler code is easier to maintain and change. And what if you did need that complex code, and your implementation sucks? Well you can just improve it. But, that is the point. No matter what you do, you will need to refactor your code sometimes. The difference is that now it's very easy to refactor it, because you made it so simple. Imagine refactoring your map system after you already wrote one thousand lines of code for it. You don't need a generic map system, you just need the simplest thing that solves your problem. You won't reuse this map system on another game and you can't implement a good generic map system because you haven't made 10 games like this before. So for now, just write some simple code, and most of the time it will be perfect for your project, and you can change and improve it later if you need to. But you can only find better ways of writing code after you work more on your project, not by planning ahead too much.

So keep things simple when coding and try to challenge yourself with this project by doing things that are a little hard for you. Now we can get to technical stuff like CMake and git, and don't worry, if you don't want to learn CMake yet, I structured the lessons so that you have this option, so go watch the next video.







