 So let’s dive into using CMake, you will first need to install it in your computer, link in the description you can just go ahead and do that, and than before you write any CMake code, you need to learn how to use it with your IDE. So in the description again, there will be several learning materials, so in the learning material number 1, you will find a repo. Go ahead and download it, or you can even fork it if you want to save the exercises that you do inside your github, and there are multiple folders inside, go ahead and enter cmakeHelloWorld. So your first exercise is to make this already made CMake project run on your IDE, we can’t move on if you don’t have that, it's like teaching C++ without ever running your code on your computer. 

	
	Now There are 2 ways to open a CMake project, the generic way that everyone uses, and the better way. So I'll start with the generic way because it works every time everywhere, so it's good that you know about it, but the better way is specific for each IDE. So I will show that for visual studio but if you have other IDE no problem, either use the generic way, or search for a tutorial for that IDE and CMake, and yes I will give you links for such tutorials. So to explain you how it works, the generic way will just generate a project for your IDE, and than you open that project from your ide. The better way however will integrate the CMake project directly into your IDE, and you will soon see why that has many advantages.




	So, back to our learning material number one, inside the cmakeHelloWorld folder, you will find a CMakeLists.txt file there. All CMake projects start from this CMakeLists.txt file so that's how you know you are in the right folder and also that's how you know this project uses CMake.

	Now let's open the CMake project using the generic way. So most people open the CMake tool and you can easily start configuring it from here, but there is a small shortcut that I always use, instead of messing with this GUI, you just need to type like 3 commands in the command prompt and you are done.


 So please do this together with me, open the command prompt in this folder, create a new directory called build, enter inside it, and type CMake .. That's all you need to do, you just create a new build folder, and inside you type CMake .. You can even just create the folder from the file explorer, and than enter it and type cmake .. here where you have your foloder path, and it will do the same thing, like isn't that way easier than messing with this tool? Now, inside this folder you will find a solution file that you can open and run and that’s the Generic way to Open a CMake project. Most people would stop here but this way of doing things has many downsides. The integration with the IDE is very wierd and you also need to close visual studio and redo this step every time you add a new file to the project. But just know about this option as a backup.



Before we talk about the better way of opening a CMake project, I want to talk about some important details that are specific to my configurations. First of all, most people just manually add the cpp files in the CMake and that's just weird. In my CMake configurations I just write a line of code that automatically adds all the cpp files that are in this src folder to the project. So using my CMake, when you add a new cpp file, click no here, because you don't want visual studio to write it into the CMake file, and than go inside the CMake and control + s to rebuild the CMake. Speaking about rebuilding, if you ever have weird problems, you can control + s on the CMake file to rebuild it, and if you still have problems, you can try a clean build. To do that, you just need to delete this out folder, and than control + s on the CMake file. With my setup, everything build related will be placed in this out folder. Or, with other IDEs it may have other names like build. But, because everything build related is in one folder, if you use git, it's super easy to make a gitignore for the project. Instead of it looking like this, it looks like this, but I will talk more about this later.

Next, we need to talk about this RESOURCES_PATH thing. I get into more details in the next video, but whenever you want to load a file you need to use this RESOURCES_PATH macro in your project. My CMake will define it to be an absolute path that points to this resources folder. Than when you want to give the game to someone else, we don't want to use absolute paths anymore. So we have to change this thing in the CMake. Set the production build to on. This will set the RESOURES_PATH macro to point to the same path as the exe, and you can compile the project and ship it along with the resources folder to someone else like so.

Now what does production build mean? A production build basically means it is a build of the game that we send to other people to play, while the opposite is a development build. A development build is basically for us the developers. In a development build we can keep some extra checks or error messages for the developer, and than in a production build we remove them. So I configure me CMake files to create a macro, that you can use to do this kind of things, like only show error messages in a production build.


 Now delete this build folder and let's move on to the better way of doing things. And again if you use another IDE than Visual Studio you will for sure find a tutorial for that trust me it's not something difficult at all, for visual studio code you need to install the right extensions and for CLion, well CLion uses CMake by default. But for Visual Studio, inside the project folder, right click, and select open with visual studio. Alternatively once you open visual studio you can select open a folder with a CMake project from here, or from here.


 So now you should be able to go from this drop down here, select CmakeHelloWorld and than you can press controll + F5 to build and run. And if this didn’t work for you it’s time to trouble shoot. So the project will entierly be generated inside this out folder, so all of the generated files will stay in here and if you delete it, you can rebuild from 0 if you ever have wierd problems. To refresh your cmake project you just need to enter inside the CMakeLists.txt file and press control + S. Also to view the out folder from here, press this show all files button, now you can easily delete it and rebuild your cmake. So if you can't see an out folder, try pressing control + S on the CMakeLists.txt file, than if you for some reason still can’t see CmakeHelloWorld here, or you have other wierd bugs, delete the out folder and again control + S on the CMake, if it still doesn't work or you don't get an out folder at all you need to check if you installed the right visual studio components. To do that go inside visual studio installer, and than go here, and you need to have this component installed. If after all this efforts things still don’t work uninstall cmake and visual studio and reinstall them, I have seen this actually fix the issue.


One final detail. To switch to a release build, meaning a build with optimizations, you go here. And than make sure you select the right option: x64 release. Than control + s and close this. And now you can switch to release.

