

In order to be able to compile this project on any platform and using any IDE I will use CMake. If you happen to already know CMake or if you don't want to use CMake, please still watch this video and the next one, it's very important, you will see why.

Very briefly, to compile a C++ project, you need a build system. Your C++ project has many files many dependences, and various flags. A build system just places them all together so you can than compile your project. And you have already used one without knowing it. If you compile with Visual Studio, you used MSBuild. The problem is that every time you want to link a new library you need to mess around with this thing here and it takes forever. Not to mention that you can only compile this project on Windows. But the biggest problem is that linking libraries takes forever. And there even more problems but all of them are solved by CMake. CMake is a build system generator, you write some CMake code, and it generates the build system for your compiler. So with this CMake code that we will write you will be able to compile the project on any IDE and on any operating system, and look how easy it is to add a new library. Going forward with making proper C++ projects, using this weird thing will slow you down massively, you need to learn CMake eventually.

 And CMake is not the only option but it is the most popular, so most libraries will have a CMake integration.

Now, everyone, will tell you CMake is horrible, and it really is horrible but that's just because those people use it in a horrible way that comes with many problems. However, I found a way to use CMake that doesn't come with any drawback, that for some reason people don't seem to know about. So that's why it's super important you watch this CMake videos even if you already know CMake, because I will show you a better way of using CMake than literally any other tutorial there is out there. And it will be a practical guide. You only care about the basic CMake things to get your C++ project up and running smoothly on your IDE and nothing more, so that's what we will cover, the more complex CMake you add to your project the more horrible it will become.

One more important thing. Most programming tutorials, would just show you how to link the libraries needed, and than move on. The problem is that after you follow those steps, you don't really end up learning much, because you need to practice writing some CMake on your own and linking some libraries on your own to learn. On the other hand, learning CMake is just boring and you probably want to start making the game. So you have 2 options. You can learn CMake now, or, you can skip learning CMake for now, make the game, and return to this tutorial later when you eventually want to learn CMake. I actually recommend this, it's way more fun and rewarding to start with the game. You do need to eventually learn CMake but there is absolutely no problem in learning it later, and until than simply use the CMake I give you, just download the source code with the CMake and don't worry about it. But if you do decide to learn it, I have here a full tutorial for you with exercise for you to practice and actually learn CMake.

So the next 3 videos are related to CMake. The first one is how to open an already made project with CMake, watch that regardless if you want to learn CMake or not so you know how to open the project, and make sure you watch it even if you know CMake already because again I do things differently.

Than, whenever you are ready to learn CMake, the second video is a full standalone CMake tutorial, but make sure you don't skip over the first one. And than finally in the third one we actually build the CMake for this project itself.

So now, go watch the next video to learn how to open the CMake project, and than, you can either spend some time learning CMake properly now, or you can skip that part, and just go on with the gamedev tutorial and return to learning CMake later.


